---
layout: post
title: "ball games"
date: 2022-08-17 12:20:00 +0200
---

Let $K$ be a field and
let $\mathcal{B}(K)$ be the space of balls on $K$,
as described in
'_Approximation theorems for spaces of localities_' -- my 2020 paper with Philip Dittmann and Arno Fehm.
That is, $\mathcal{B}(K)$ is the set of _balls_: subsets $\mathcal{O}\subseteq K$ that are (a) closed under multiplication and satisfy (b) $\mathcal{O}\cup\mathcal{O}^{-1}=K$.
We immediately get
$0,1,-1\in\mathcal{O}$ for all $\mathcal{O}$.

Our favourite examples of balls are (i) valuation rings, (ii) closed unit intervals $[-1,1]$ with respect to a field ordering, and (iii) closed unit disks $\bar{D}(1;0)$ of absolute values.
The relationships between these three examples are interesting:
rank $1$ valuations come from non-archimedean absolute values, and archimedean orderings give absolute values.

Missing from the axioms (a,b) is any explicit mention of additivity: some balls are closed under addition (e.g. valuation rings), others not (e.g. closed unit intervals and disks) ---
but in the latter examples we at least have $\mathcal{O}+\mathcal{O}\subseteq 2\mathcal{O}$.

A ball $\mathcal{O}$ is closed under addition if and only if it is a valuation ring.
For each $n\in\mathbb{N}$
there is an obvious question:
_what can we say about those balls $\mathcal{O}$ that satisfy the property $(n)$, where:_

(n): &nbsp; $\mathcal{O}+\mathcal{O}\subseteq n\mathcal{O}$ &nbsp;?

Clearly (1) holds iff $\mathcal{O}$ is a subring iff $\mathcal{O}$ is a valuation ring.

### Property (2).

Let's assume (2) holds for $\mathcal{O}$ and $\mathrm{char}(K)\neq2$.
If $2\in\mathcal{O}$, then (2) implies (1), so we're back in the valuation ring case.
Otherwise, we may suppose $2\notin\mathcal{O}$, and so $\tfrac{1}{2}\in\mathcal{O}$.

[//]: # ( Define $$\hat{\mathcal{O}}=\bigcup_{n\in\mathbb{N}}n\mathcal{O}$$. Clearly $\hat{\mathcal{O}}$ satisfies ...  Note $\mathcal{O}+\mathcal{O}+\mathcal{O}\subseteq$ Let $m,n\in\mathbb{N}$ and $a,b\in\mathcal{O}$.  Then $ma+bn$ )

- Define 
$$\hat{\mathcal{O}}=\bigcup_{n\in\mathbb{N}}\sum_{i<n}\mathcal{O}$$
be the ring generated by
$$\mathcal{O}$$.

As discussed, this is even a valuation ring,
corresponding to a valuation $v$, say.
We want $\mathcal{O}$ to induce a ball on the residue field $Kv$:

- Define
$$\bar{\mathcal{O}}:=\{x+\mathfrak{m}_{v}\mid x\in\hat{\mathcal{O}}\}.$$

Note
$\bar{\mathcal{O}}$ is
closed under multiplication,
and $\bar{\mathcal{O}}\cup\bar{\mathcal{O}}^{-1}=Kv$,
so that $\bar{\mathcal{O}}\in\mathcal{B}(Kv)$.

Question.
_Does $\bar{\mathcal{O}}$ correspond to an absolute value on $Kv$?_

- For each $x\in Kv$, define
$$|x|:=\min\{t\in\mathbb{R}_{\geq0}\mid x\in t\bar{\mathcal{O}}\}.$$

Is this an absolute value?

- Clearly
$|0|=0$.
- Suppose
$x\in\tfrac{m}{n}\mathcal{O}$,
i.e. $nx\in m\mathcal{O}$.
Then $x^{-1}$
- $$|x+y|\leq t$$

So perhaps one can associate a number $t\in[0,1]$ to each $\mathcal{O}$ to measure how far away from being additively closed it is:

$$n_{\mathcal{O}}=\inf\{n\in\mathbb{N}\mid \mathcal{O}+\mathcal{O}\subseteq n\mathcal{O}\}\in\mathbb{N}\cup\{\infty\}.$$

The closer $t_{\mathcal{O}}$ is to $0$, the less additively closed $\mathcal{O}$ is.
We can also define
$$\mathcal{B}_{t}(K)=\{\mathcal{O}\mid t(\mathcal{O}+\mathcal{O})\subseteq\mathcal{O}\}$$
$$\mathcal{B}_{t}(K)=\{\mathcal{O}\mid t_{\mathcal{O}}\geq t\},$$
for $t\in[0,1]$.
Then
$$\mathcal{B}_{0}(K)=\bigcap_{t>0}\mathcal{B}_{t},$$by a simple argument.










