---
layout: post
title: fishing
date: 2022-08-17 12:20:00 +0200
---

Let $K$ be a field and
let $\mathcal{B}(K)$ be the space of balls on $K$,
as described in
'_Approximation theorems for spaces of localities_' -- my 2020 paper with Philip Dittmann and Arno Fehm.
That is, $\mathcal{B}(K)$ is the set of _balls_: subsets $\mathcal{O}\subseteq K$ that are (a) closed under multiplication and satisfy (b) $\mathcal{O}\cup\mathcal{O}^{-1}=K$.
We immediately get
$0,1,-1\in\mathcal{O}$ for all $\mathcal{O}$.

Our favourite examples of balls are (i) valuation rings, (ii) closed unit intervals $[-1,1]$ with respect to a field ordering, and (iii) closed unit disks $\bar{D}(1;0)$ of absolute values.
The relationships between these three examples are interesting:
rank $1$ valuations come from non-archimedean absolute values, and archimedean orderings give absolute values.

Missing from the axioms (a,b) is any explicit mention of additivity: some balls are closed under addition (e.g. valuation rings), others not (e.g. closed unit intervals and disks) ---
but in the latter case we have $\mathcal{O}+\mathcal{O}\subseteq 2\mathcal{O}$.

Note that a ball $\mathcal{O}$ is closed under addition if and only if it is a valuation ring.
For each $n\in\mathbb{N}$, we have the following question:
_what can we say about those balls $\mathcal{O}$ that satisfy the property $(n)$:_

(n): &nbsp; $\mathcal{O}+\mathcal{O}\subseteq n\mathcal{O}$ &nbsp;?

Clearly (1) holds iff $\mathcal{O}$ is a subring iff $\mathcal{O}$ is a valuation ring.

Assuming that $\mathrm{char}(K)\neq2$,
each $\mathcal{O}$ must contain $2$ or $\tfrac{1}{2}$:
the unit interval in $\mathbb{Q}$ contains only $\tfrac{1}{2}$,
the $2$-adic valuation ring on $\mathbb{Q}$ contains only $2$,
and the trivial ball $\mathcal{O}=\mathbb{Q}$ contains both.
Two easy implications:
- (c.i)$\implies2\in\mathcal{O}$,
- (c.ii)$\implies\tfrac{1}{2}\in\mathcal{O}$.

Let's say that $\mathcal{O}$ is _trivial_ on $a\in K^{\times}$ if both $a,a^{-1}$ are in $\mathcal{O}$.
Thus, assuming $\mathrm{char}(K)\neq2$, if $\mathcal{O}$ is non-trivial on $2$, either (c.i) or (c.ii) fails.

The most obvious question is:
_can we find $\mathcal{O}\in\mathcal{B}(K)$ such that_



So perhaps one can associate a number $t\in[0,1]$ to each $\mathcal{O}$ to measure how far away from being additively closed it is:

$$t_{\mathcal{O}}=\inf\{t\in[0,1]\mid t(\mathcal{O}+\mathcal{O})\subseteq\mathcal{O}\}.$$

The closer $t_{\mathcal{O}}$ is to $0$, the less additively closed $\mathcal{O}$ is.
We can also define
$$\mathcal{B}_{t}(K)=\{\mathcal{O}\mid t(\mathcal{O}+\mathcal{O})\subseteq\mathcal{O}\}$$
$$\mathcal{B}_{t}(K)=\{\mathcal{O}\mid t_{\mathcal{O}}\geq t\},$$
for $t\in[0,1]$.
Then
$$\mathcal{B}_{0}(K)=\bigcap_{t>0}\mathcal{B}_{t},$$by a simple argument.










